README-proftool.md, before:

# README #

`proftool` is a utility for capturing and examining profiles of Java
programs.  It's intended to provide machine level details about the execution to
aid with JIT performance analysis.  It currently consists of three primary components:

* a JVMTI agent for capturing all the assembly generated by the JVM.
* a parser for Linux perf output
* a parser for HotSpot LogCompilation information

By combining these components into a single command line, the perf
profile information can be attributed to the JIT code.

This suite must be built first to create the JVMTI agent library and the suite is normally dynamically
imported to make the commands available through mx.

### Recording a profile

There are currently 2 ways to capture profiles.  The direct way is to use the `profrecord` command
which takes a full Java command line as an argument and launches it with extra arguments
to collect the data.

```
$ mx profrecord -E fop /home/graal/oraclejdk1.8.0_291-jvmci-21.1-b03/bin/java -jar dacapo.jar fop -n 56
```

This should work with any Java command line you can supply.

The second way is to use the `proftool` profiler with the `mx benchmark` command.  The `proftool` profiler
conflicts with the `rss` tracker which is enabled by default, so it currently must be explicitly turned off.  For example, running:

```
$ mx benchmark dacapo:fop --tracker none -- --profiler proftool
```

produces a uniquely named directory like `proftool_fop_2021-07-11_181530` which contains a profile of the full
benchmark run.  Note that the `--tracker` and `--profiler` arguments are on different sides of the `--` separator.

After capturing the profile, the perf binary output needs to be converted to text
using the `profpackage` command because the current benchmark profiler infrastructure can't do that automatically.

```
$ mx profpackage proftool_fop_2021-07-11_181530
Created /home/graal/ws/graal/compiler/proftool_fop_2021-07-11_181530.zip
```

This command additionally packs everything into a zip to make it easy to move profiles around,
though that step can be skipped with the `-n` option.  Both the zip and directory form can be used directly
by all the `proftool` commands so use whichever form is most convenient.

Not all benchmark suites actually support the `--profiler` option even though it's broadly advertised in the
help output.  At the current time, only the `dacapo`, `scala-dacapo`, `renaissance` and `renassiance-legacy`
suites fully support the `--profiler` option.  The `JMH` benchmarks only correctly support it when the
the JMH option `-f 0` is used to suppress forking by the harness.  Note that this changes that way the benchmark
is run and might not produce the same results.  With `JMH` you can always fall back to the `JMH` `perfasm`
profiler which is sufficient for most uses.

For other benchmarks, you can always use `mx profrecord` directly by capturing the command
line used to launch the benchmark with `mx -v benchmark ...` and then passing that to `mx profrecord`.  For example,
to use `proftool` with the octane benchmarks:

```
$ mx -v --dy /graal-js,js-benchmarks benchmark octane:zlib --tracker none --
```
displays a very long command line in the middle of all the output that looks kind of like this:

```
/home/graal/ws/graal/compiler/mxbuild/darwin-amd64/graaljdks/jdk1.8-cmp/bin/java -server ... \
  com.oracle.truffle.js.shell.JSLauncher /home/graal/ws/js-benchmarks/harness.js -- --show-warmup \
  /home/graal/ws/js-benchmarks/octane-zlib.js    
```

For compactness, the sample output above doesn't include all required arguments.
Copy and paste that line to use it with `mx profrecord`:

```
$ mx profrecord -E zlib /home/graal/ws/graal/compiler/mxbuild/darwin-amd64/graaljdks/jdk1.8-cmp/bin/java -server ... \
  com.oracle.truffle.js.shell.JSLauncher /home/graal/ws/js-benchmarks/harness.js -- --show-warmup \
  /home/graal/ws/js-benchmarks/octane-zlib.js    
```

### Examining a profile.

Profile collection currently only supports Linux perf though once the data is captured then the profile can
be viewed anywhere.  The primary command for examining profiles is `profhot`.  This gives a summary
of the top C functions and the top JIT methods.  The JIT methods are additionally disassembled and
annotated with the profile information.  Truncated sample output looks like this:

```
$ mx profhot proftool_fop_2021-07-11_181530.zip
Hot C functions:
  Percent   Name
    5.39%   SpinPause
    2.07%   ParMarkBitMap::mark_obj
    1.98%   ParallelCompactData::add_obj
    0.95%   GreyObjectsWalker_walkGreyObjects_e59a80a81022647b793f2f995d251cf18cbcbab4
    0.79%   ControlFlowGraph_identifyBlocks_91c6bd2376323c10cda627f1ed5130f90d88a82f
    0.69%   EconomicMapImpl_compareKeys_139d60c35d64f232b5b9fac87391585f45801e09
    0.67%   ArrayList_add_43f6399c3b46d50c69e7ebaee5e44ba3b6a870f3
    0.58%   ControlFlowGraph_identifyBlock_7f27028f31036b771721050156eba6ce33899dfa
    0.55%   SchedulePhase$Instance_scheduleEarliestIterative_f11f1d84d698be305ec40ea50fa995f7185d393f
    0.54%   EconomicMapImpl_find_70589f86ac2abbc40566645a1af83af4aa5c89f0

Hot generated code:
  Percent   Compile Id  Name
    1.97%         2557  sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa(int, long, int, boolean)
    1.86%         3101  org.apache.fop.render.ps.PSRenderer.renderText(org.apache.fop.area.inline.AbstractTextArea, java.lang.String, int[])
    1.27%               Interpreter
    1.12%         3353  org.apache.fop.fo.FObj.addChildNode(org.apache.fop.fo.FONode)
    0.75%         3112  java.text.DigitList.set(boolean, double, int, boolean)
    0.63%         1357  org.apache.fop.fo.properties.PropertyMaker.get(int, org.apache.fop.fo.PropertyList, boolean, boolean)
    0.61%         3145  org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.inline.TextLayoutManager.getNextKnuthElements(org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.LayoutContext, int)
    0.51%         3110  java.text.DecimalFormat.subformat(java.lang.StringBuffer, java.text.Format$FieldDelegate, boolean, boolean, int, int, int, int)
    0.34%         2787  org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.inline.TextLayoutManager.addAreas(org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.PositionIterator, org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.LayoutContext)
    0.32%         2738  org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.inline.TextLayoutManager.createTextArea(org.apache.fop.traits.MinOptMax, int, org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.LayoutContext, int, int, int, boolean)

sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa(int, long, int, boolean)
0x7f7a69251e80-0x7f7a69252d38 (samples=613, period=2591391597)
Hot region 1
       0x7f7a69252082:  sub     ecx, edi        ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:252
       0x7f7a69252084:  mov     edx, ecx        ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:287
       0x7f7a69252086:  add     edx, r13d
       0x7f7a69252089:  add     edx, dword ptr [rax + rsi*4 + 0x10]     ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:307
 0.16% 0x7f7a6925208d:  cmp     edx, 0x40       ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:330
       0x7f7a69252090:  jge     0x7f7a69252a62
       0x7f7a69252096:  sub     r10d, r14d      ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:372
       0x7f7a69252099:  sub     r10d, edi       ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:259
       0x7f7a6925209c:  mov     edi, r10d       ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:294
       0x7f7a6925209f:  add     edi, dword ptr [rax + rbx*4 + 0x10]
       0x7f7a692520a3:  inc     edi
       0x7f7a692520a5:  cmp     edi, 0x40
       0x7f7a692520a8:  jge     0x7f7a69252c6f
 ...
```

Every piece of generated code is disassembled and broken into hot regions where ticks are clustered.  This gives a general
overview of the hot parts of the execution.

Other options to profhot give more control over how this is printed.  It's possible to strip package names from the output
using the '-s' option which can make the output more compact.  The debug information associated with a pc can be
quite deep which will overwhelm the actually assembly output.  The '-c' option can be used to control the number of frames printed,
so passing `0` will hide the frame information completely and `1` will show just deepest inline frame.

Commit message:

Add comments about Truffle support

README-proftool.md, after:

# README #

`proftool` is a utility for capturing and examining profiles of Java
programs.  It's intended to provide machine level details about the execution to
aid with JIT performance analysis.  It currently consists of three primary components:

* a JVMTI agent for capturing all the assembly generated by the JVM.
* a parser for Linux perf output
* a parser for HotSpot LogCompilation information

By combining these components into a single command line, the perf
profile information can be attributed to the JIT code.

This suite must be built first to create the JVMTI agent library and the suite is normally dynamically
imported to make the commands available through mx.

### Recording a profile

There are currently 2 ways to capture profiles.  The direct way is to use the `profrecord` command
which takes a full Java command line as an argument and launches it with extra arguments
to collect the data.

```
$ mx profrecord -E fop /home/graal/oraclejdk1.8.0_291-jvmci-21.1-b03/bin/java -jar dacapo.jar fop -n 56
```

This should work with any Java command line you can supply.

The second way is to use the `proftool` profiler with the `mx benchmark` command.  The `proftool` profiler
conflicts with the `rss` tracker which is enabled by default, so it currently must be explicitly turned off.  For example, running:

```
$ mx benchmark dacapo:fop --tracker none -- --profiler proftool
```

produces a uniquely named directory like `proftool_fop_2021-07-11_181530` which contains a profile of the full
benchmark run.  Note that the `--tracker` and `--profiler` arguments are on different sides of the `--` separator.

After capturing the profile, the perf binary output needs to be converted to text
using the `profpackage` command because the current benchmark profiler infrastructure can't do that automatically.

```
$ mx profpackage proftool_fop_2021-07-11_181530
Created /home/graal/ws/graal/compiler/proftool_fop_2021-07-11_181530.zip
```

This command additionally packs everything into a zip to make it easy to move profiles around,
though that step can be skipped with the `-n` option.  Both the zip and directory form can be used directly
by all the `proftool` commands so use whichever form is most convenient.

Not all benchmark suites actually support the `--profiler` option even though it's broadly advertised in the
help output.  At the current time, only the `dacapo`, `scala-dacapo`, `renaissance` and `renassiance-legacy`
suites fully support the `--profiler` option.  The `JMH` benchmarks only correctly support it when the
the JMH option `-f 0` is used to suppress forking by the harness.  Note that this changes that way the benchmark
is run and might not produce the same results.  With `JMH` you can always fall back to the `JMH` `perfasm`
profiler which is sufficient for most uses.

For other benchmarks, you can always use `mx profrecord` directly by capturing the command
line used to launch the benchmark with `mx -v benchmark ...` and then passing that to `mx profrecord`.  For example,
to use `proftool` with the octane benchmarks:

```
$ mx -v --dy /graal-js,js-benchmarks benchmark octane:zlib --tracker none --
```
displays a very long command line in the middle of all the output that looks kind of like this:

```
/home/graal/ws/graal/compiler/mxbuild/darwin-amd64/graaljdks/jdk1.8-cmp/bin/java -server ... \
  com.oracle.truffle.js.shell.JSLauncher /home/graal/ws/js-benchmarks/harness.js -- --show-warmup \
  /home/graal/ws/js-benchmarks/octane-zlib.js    
```

For compactness, the sample output above doesn't include all required arguments.
Copy and paste that line to use it with `mx profrecord`:

```
$ mx profrecord -E zlib /home/graal/ws/graal/compiler/mxbuild/darwin-amd64/graaljdks/jdk1.8-cmp/bin/java -server ... \
  com.oracle.truffle.js.shell.JSLauncher /home/graal/ws/js-benchmarks/harness.js -- --show-warmup \
  /home/graal/ws/js-benchmarks/octane-zlib.js    
```

### Examining a profile.

Profile collection currently only supports Linux perf though once the data is captured then the profile can
be viewed anywhere.  The primary command for examining profiles is `profhot`.  This gives a summary
of the top C functions and the top JIT methods.  The JIT methods are additionally disassembled and
annotated with the profile information.  Truncated sample output looks like this:

```
$ mx profhot proftool_fop_2021-07-11_181530.zip
Hot C functions:
  Percent   Name
    5.39%   SpinPause
    2.07%   ParMarkBitMap::mark_obj
    1.98%   ParallelCompactData::add_obj
    0.95%   GreyObjectsWalker_walkGreyObjects_e59a80a81022647b793f2f995d251cf18cbcbab4
    0.79%   ControlFlowGraph_identifyBlocks_91c6bd2376323c10cda627f1ed5130f90d88a82f
    0.69%   EconomicMapImpl_compareKeys_139d60c35d64f232b5b9fac87391585f45801e09
    0.67%   ArrayList_add_43f6399c3b46d50c69e7ebaee5e44ba3b6a870f3
    0.58%   ControlFlowGraph_identifyBlock_7f27028f31036b771721050156eba6ce33899dfa
    0.55%   SchedulePhase$Instance_scheduleEarliestIterative_f11f1d84d698be305ec40ea50fa995f7185d393f
    0.54%   EconomicMapImpl_find_70589f86ac2abbc40566645a1af83af4aa5c89f0

Hot generated code:
  Percent   Compile Id  Name
    1.97%         2557  sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa(int, long, int, boolean)
    1.86%         3101  org.apache.fop.render.ps.PSRenderer.renderText(org.apache.fop.area.inline.AbstractTextArea, java.lang.String, int[])
    1.27%               Interpreter
    1.12%         3353  org.apache.fop.fo.FObj.addChildNode(org.apache.fop.fo.FONode)
    0.75%         3112  java.text.DigitList.set(boolean, double, int, boolean)
    0.63%         1357  org.apache.fop.fo.properties.PropertyMaker.get(int, org.apache.fop.fo.PropertyList, boolean, boolean)
    0.61%         3145  org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.inline.TextLayoutManager.getNextKnuthElements(org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.LayoutContext, int)
    0.51%         3110  java.text.DecimalFormat.subformat(java.lang.StringBuffer, java.text.Format$FieldDelegate, boolean, boolean, int, int, int, int)
    0.34%         2787  org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.inline.TextLayoutManager.addAreas(org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.PositionIterator, org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.LayoutContext)
    0.32%         2738  org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.inline.TextLayoutManager.createTextArea(org.apache.fop.traits.MinOptMax, int, org.apache.fop.layoutmgr.LayoutContext, int, int, int, boolean)

sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa(int, long, int, boolean)
0x7f7a69251e80-0x7f7a69252d38 (samples=613, period=2591391597)
Hot region 1
       0x7f7a69252082:  sub     ecx, edi        ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:252
       0x7f7a69252084:  mov     edx, ecx        ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:287
       0x7f7a69252086:  add     edx, r13d
       0x7f7a69252089:  add     edx, dword ptr [rax + rsi*4 + 0x10]     ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:307
 0.16% 0x7f7a6925208d:  cmp     edx, 0x40       ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:330
       0x7f7a69252090:  jge     0x7f7a69252a62
       0x7f7a69252096:  sub     r10d, r14d      ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:372
       0x7f7a69252099:  sub     r10d, edi       ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:259
       0x7f7a6925209c:  mov     edi, r10d       ; sun.misc.FloatingDecimal$BinaryToASCIIBuffer.dtoa:294
       0x7f7a6925209f:  add     edi, dword ptr [rax + rbx*4 + 0x10]
       0x7f7a692520a3:  inc     edi
       0x7f7a692520a5:  cmp     edi, 0x40
       0x7f7a692520a8:  jge     0x7f7a69252c6f
 ...
```

Every piece of generated code is disassembled and broken into hot regions where ticks are clustered.  This gives a general
overview of the hot parts of the execution.

Proftool provides limited extra support for Truffle programs at the moment.  The only extra information printed is the Truffle
provided name of the generated nmethod when printing the nmethod names.  This results in summary output like this for
the octane splay benchmark:

```
Hot generated code:
  Percent   Name
    3.04%   10260: "MeasureDefault#2" OptimizedCallTarget.profiledPERoot(Object[])
    1.79%   5934: "GeneratePayloadTree#2" OptimizedCallTarget.profiledPERoot(Object[])
    0.74%   10118: "SplayTree.remove#2" OptimizedCallTarget.profiledPERoot(Object[])
    0.65%   Interpreter
    0.18%   7976: "SplayRun#2" OptimizedCallTarget.profiledPERoot(Object[])
    0.16%   11695: FastDtoa.digitGen(DiyFp, DiyFp, DiyFp, DtoaBuffer, int)
    0.13%   8914: "SplayTree.splay_#2" OptimizedCallTarget.profiledPERoot(Object[])
    0.07%   1345: OptimizedCallTarget.callBoundary(Object[])
    0.07%   jshort_disjoint_arraycopy
    0.07%   7877: "SplayTree.splay_#1" OptimizedCallTarget.profiledPERoot(Object[])
```

OptimizedCallTarget is the Java method that is used by the partial evaluator when compiling Truffle methods and the name
in quotes should correspond to the compiled JavaScript function.  More support is planned for future versions of prftool. 

Other options to profhot give more control over how this is printed.  It's possible to strip package names from the output
using the '-s' option which can make the output more compact.  The debug information associated with a pc can be
quite deep which will overwhelm the actual assembly output.  The '-c' option can be used to control the number of frames printed,
so passing `0` will hide the frame information completely and `1` will show just deepest inline frame.
